"Hello and welcome to another episode of no such thing as a fish, a weekly podcast
coming to you from the QI offices in Hobern.
My name is Dan Schreiber, I am sitting here with Andrew Hunter Murray, James Harkin, and
Anatishinsky. And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite
facts from the last seven days and in no particular order, here we go. Starting with fact number
one, and looky looky, it's Anatishinsky."
My fact this week is that wild oats sow themselves. Yeah, so basically they're plants that look
a bit like oats and they have seeds at the top of them that come in little cluster that's
called a panicle. But they don't panic, they very calmly have two spikes sticking out of
them called oons and they look a bit like very long hairy legs. And basically when the
seeds come off, they go onto the ground and when they dry out, they twist one way and
when they get moist, they twist another. So as the moisture goes up and down, they twist
back and forth. And it reminded me a bit of one of those moves used to do in gym where
you lie on your back and play your legs out and roll around. You know, I'm back in that gym anyway.
We just sort of did the bleep test and stuff at my school. Yeah, I teach you a fact actually.
But they sort of, it makes them sort of crawl around and then they'll find a crevice, eventually
they'll fall into a crevice. And once they've fallen into a crevice, this motion makes
them drill down into it so they literally bury themselves.
It's the closest thing you'll see to something that's not sentient being absolutely sentient.
It just looks like it's got a mind. It's not guaranteed your sentence. It's a dream stuff.
I think it's a life, guys. I think it is a life. No, honestly, it is a life.
Well, there we go. James agrees. What are they? You two.
Um, um, why don't so they, the ancestors of the oats that we eat?
We think so, although there seems to be some disagreement, but I think they are, yes, although
the oats that we eat, the cultivated oats have lost these ones because they're bred
out so the seeds can get much bigger. And wild oats are, I think, a weed. Yes.
Right. And they're quite annoying because they can plant themselves. Yeah. So the idea of
sowing wild oats is something that you would never need to do it because they do it themselves,
but also you wouldn't want to do it because it gets in the way of all your normal plants.
Mm hmm. So sowing wild oats became a phrase that meant just doing something pointless as
stupid. Yeah. So go out and have fun in a promiscuous sexual way because you're not going
to marry these people, but go out and do that and then find the person you're going to
marry. Yeah. So it was not originally sexual as well. It was just people having fun and messing
around and stuff. And actually an interesting thing that I found is that the word haver,
which I've only ever heard in the song, I'm going to walk 500 miles by proclaimers. You know,
if I haver, then I know I'm going to haver with you or whatever it is. Okay. That the word
haver means oats and havering means sort of messing around, not doing anything properly.
And it's the same origin as this wild oats. Oh my god. So that means that we have a new
sentence person to add to my list, Nigel Havers. Oh, yeah. That's a thrill. Anna, I've been updating
the list. Oh, have you ever told me that? It's been a long time. Anna, there's a new list.
Don't worry. We'll get onto the new list. I'm okay. I think it ended up meaning something
immoral really early, though, because by the turn of the 17th century, so from the late 16th
century, wild oats plural weirdly was a term for a disillute and immoral man. So you'd say he's a
bit of a wild oats. Yeah, the earliest juices by someone called Thomas Beacon from the 16th century,
and he talks about certain white brains and wild oats, and he's talking about stupid people,
basically, or idiots. And he also coined the terms bucketful, epicurism, omni-sufficient,
17th flea, unbearded, and worsist. Honestly, I think bucketful is the big hit of the
me of that list. I just love worsist. I think worsist is definitely the worsist of some of
them. So there are four kinds of wild oats, right? Yeah. They're all Avena-Sumpting, Avena-Sativer,
Avena-By-Zentine, Avena-Strigos, those last two, mostly just to feed animals. But there's
a fourth kind. Avena-A-Bisinnica, which I read is only partly domesticated. Oh, it's a bit
disobedient. I don't really know what it means, but I just like it so much. Of course, according
to some people, they are still only animal feed, or according to Samuel Johnson, three hundred
years ago, who famously said he described the Oat, the normal Oat, as a grain which in England
is generally given to horses, but in Scotland appears to support the people.
That's not one of his good ones. Well, I think it is one of his most famous ones, isn't it?
And he later wrote to Boswell his friend, he wrote, "I meant to vex them about that particular
thing." He did it on purpose to mine the Scots Up. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So annoying.
They were a big Scottish thing, weren't they? They thrived in the Scottish climate and
all of that. And they were grown in huge quantities. Brought over by the Romans, right? So they
weren't there until the Romans got there. And then the climate was just so perfect, because
it was wet sunny, it was a long day short. It just perfectly suited it. And yeah, that sort
of became the thing of what Scottish people were brought up on. And saved Britain during
the war to a certain extent. Second World War. Obviously, a big deal of cutting off food supplies
and cutting off Atlantic food, convoys, and things like that. And oats became a really
big deal. They were substituted a lot of the wheat that you then couldn't get back
there. White bread was illegal. Was it? Yeah. Did you have sweet oat bread? Because that's
quite different to wheat bread, isn't it? I can't remember what the oats were used for.
There was, I think, called the national loaf, which was just very, I think very, very good
for you bread, but obviously not very delicious. Although it sounds like a sort of reform party
good. It's a reform party merchandise. There's a loaf. There's bros, which is kind of
porridge that you don't cook. It's just cold water and oat meal together. We should start
like a bros podcast. We should start like a bros podcast. It's a porridge. It's a lot of
jock-seated porridge. Such bad timing, Anna. No, really sad not to be involved in that, but
wouldn't make sense for that. Oats had a renaissance since the '90s, hasn't it? It sort of appears
everywhere in different things. Now oat milk, particularly. That was invented in the '90s.
I thought we had that for a very long time. Ricard Ost, O-S-T-E, which is almost an anagram
of oats. He's a Swedish scientist and, as well as inventing it, he is a professor at
Lund University, where we will be going very soon to be doing our live shows. Is he still
trading? He's still there, so we could meet him, but he only spends 20% of his time there
at the university, so hopefully we will. Hopefully we will. He's still one day a week. I think
is what you mean. He's official biography says he only spends 20% of his time. No, because
there's seven days in a week. I suppose one point four. Hopefully we're there on the
one point four a day. We'll see. That's brilliant. I didn't actually know how they made
oat milk. It's just because I've never thought about it. We always have something in the
box, but I thought it was just just dry. I suppose there is moisture in there. If you zoom
in, there's those tiny udders hanging off each grain, but they mix it with water. Of course,
they do. They make it into a kind of suspension. So they make it into, what, porridge, right?
Watery porridge, and then they take out the oats. That's how they do it. It sounds gross
when you say it like that. I bet it wouldn't work if I did it, but I quite like it. Yeah,
it's really good. I looked up cereal bars. I got a bit distracted. Just on when things
were invented, Danny was surprised that oat milk was a 90s invention. The first cereal
bar, any guesses? OK. 20,000 BC. OK. Laser, laser. I found some in a cave in South Africa.
I found the rapper. So I will say, I don't know if it's surprising enough to justify a quiz.
I think it'd be more surprising if it was very late, because cereal bar could just be you
dropped some honey on two bits of grain, isn't it? I mean, is it, is it the 80s, Andy? It's
1981. That's actually amazing. That is surprising. It is late, isn't it? Yeah. It is later than
I thought. That's late. I'm astonished. It was called cereal crunchy. And that means, of
course, that David Niven or Muddy Waters could both have enjoyed a cereal bar. Oh, my God.
There's too much to catch Anna up. It's actually the very new bit, in fact, a two-week-old
baby would be old enough to remember when and the invented this new bit. OK. Speaking of
cereal, they used to be called cheerioats, but Quakeroats owned the idea of having goats
in cereal, so they had to remove the tea and call themselves cheerioats instead. Oh, wow,
really? Is that why ready-break? Which I've never understood what that is, but it doesn't
have oats in it in the title. Oh, yeah. Even that's probably that's also porridge. Is it oats?
Yeah, it's porridge, right, Brad? It's the Quakeroats. Trademarked oats as a seed stuff.
Largely speaking, they have. Now, I think probably if your fingers made out of oats,
then it would be hard to argue that you can't call it oats, but obviously in one or two cases,
they have pushed it. Like Scott's porridge oats, my preferred brand. It's just called oats,
that's a lot. It could be like that's in the UK, for instance, whereas cheerioats would have been in
America where of course Quakeroats began. And also not made by Quakers. Not even blooming Quakers.
Can't believe that. I think the Quakers need to sue them. They just made up the name Quaker,
because it sounds really on-ironically honest and full of integrity. They didn't make up for that.
Sorry, they didn't invent the wrong Quaker. Apparently one of them read a cycle pedeer
article on Quakers and thought, oh, they sound great. I'm going to call my cereal after them.
You wouldn't do it these days, I think. No. Just pick a religion and...
Scientologist Flakes. There was a company called Early Bird who got sued because they named one of
their products Hall in Oats, H-A-U-L-I-N. And they got sued by Hall and Oats, the band.
Daryl Hall. Yeah. I think that's fair enough because they've obviously taken their name.
Yeah. Rolled Oats. Yeah. Steel Cut Oats. Any prefs? If I was to see them both on the shelf.
Yeah. And I wanted to get some very special Oats because Andy's coming round to stay over.
Yeah. And I know that he loves his Oats and I want to get him something special.
I would go for the rolled Oats because I feel like it's more done by a caveman with a big stone
and rolled it over to make it worse. Yeah. Well actually, steel cut are the least processed.
They've just been sliced around a bit. The rolled ones have been steamed a bit, I think,
and rolled into a flake. So if you want to go with classic, the hardest possible one to cook,
you want steel cut Oats, which is what I use. Oats are very good for one medical condition,
and you have to get into a big bath full of Oats to cure it. Oh, I know because we had it recently.
Chicken pox. Oh, no. Oh, well, there are two conditions. They can be killed by Oats. I was talking about
sunburn. Really. You must be the same kind of soothing skin thing. Apparently you make a nice cool
bath. Yeah. Dropper load of Oats in it. And then you get in. So you basically are the porridge.
Interesting. It's pretty good. You're unlike the little blob of jam. You're the blob of jam.
For sure. That's it. You're not the Oats. Yeah. That's really interesting. Do you know that in Scotland,
they would make oatmeal paltices for minor boils. So what we would do is you would get that oatmeal,
and you would put some butter in it, and you would boil it up, and then you would cool it,
and then you would put it against your boils. And if the boils were really difficult,
then you would use urine instead of butter. Oh, no, I think it's fine. I think actually it's not
that bad, Doctor. I think it's fine. I think I'll have the oats, please. There are also good
apparently for curing your own warts. And what you had to do was take 81 stems of oats,
bind them into nine bundles of nine, and hide them under a stone. And as the stems rotted,
your warts would disappear. Did people just have a lot more warts and boils?
Yeah, because we hadn't cured them all by doing this oats thing. Yeah. I just feel like there
are many more boil cures that are older than. Yeah, you're right. Yeah. Do we have,
has anyone here ever had a boil? Yeah. Oh, really? I think I had one on tour with all of us on the
top of my butt. Remember? Was that the one that you came around to my room and pod oats into my back?
Yeah, I've had warts on my feet. Yeah, same as a kid. Yeah, you get warts, don't you?
Yeah. Not sure I've ever had a wart. Really? Yeah. Okay, podcasted queue either. Come if you want to
give any warts. Okay, it is time for fact number two, and that is James. Okay, my fact this week is
that the world's first electric internet connected SUV car, which was designed to help you easily
locate parking spots and petrol stations was Chinese and called the wrong way. Very, very beautiful.
Beautiful. So I've just been to China and I got a car to pick us up from the airport and it was on
an app. And when we arrived there, I looked at the app and it said to look out for wrong way.
And I thought it was like a joke name that the driver had given himself or something. So I googled
it and it turns out that Rover, the car manufacturer, I think went bust in the UK and then a Chinese
company bought the technology, but not the name. And they made a new name that was kind of a
transliterated version of Rover. It's a railway, but if you pronounce it in opinion, then you say it
wrong way. It sounds almost exactly the same as wrong way in English. Wrong way. Yeah, that's brilliant.
So just further context on the name thing, my Chinese name, which I grew up with in Hong Kong,
is Shia Bo. Shia Bo is Shriver. Shia, and Bo. But it doesn't really work because it's Uncle Egg.
When you put those two words together, you, yeah, my Chinese name is Uncle Egg. That's kind of cute.
Wow. Yeah. So that was always just caused a barrier head. You should save your head.
I think you could definitely pull off an uncle egg. Yeah. And you'll be, because eggs aren't hairy
on the bottom, aren't they? It could be like an egg coming out of the chicken. Oh, I could be
emerging. Yeah. That is nice. Stick a little feather on your face and some bad poo on the other side.
And what's really useful about pinion is you would use the alphabet that we use in English,
but Mandarin has four tones as well. And so if you say a word often, if you just had P-I-N-G,
Ping, you wouldn't know if it's Ping, Ping, Ping. So that's what it gives you on top of each word.
It gives you the guidance of the the arrow as it were. I think what's interesting with that is
like, because Chinese is like non-alphabetic, they're always approximate, I think. Yeah. That's
bad. So that's why you get sort of like a word which is Uncle Egg, but actually you can translate
those two syllables to something which doesn't say Uncle Egg, it might say. Disgusting pervert.
It's going to say excellent podcast, but yeah, well, there are four tones. That's why satire in China
is actually really good and really subtle because you are able to make fun of political characters via
the use of pinion and Chinese characters because of the multiple meanings. And when they're going
to arrest you, do they get to say, I don't like your tone, young man. Yeah, that's good.
Can I check your fact, James? Yeah. You said this was the world's first electric internet
connected, that's a big car. According to their website. So why are you using it to locate
petrol stations? Ah, well. Where do you wash your car? Good point. I pay the local kids.
That's a good point actually. I do go to petrol stations to buy food. Flowers for your wife?
Flowers for your wife. It's all the best stuff there, isn't it? Screamosh. Ginstus pasties.
I also go there to wash my car and often there are charging points in petrol stations,
but that's a very good point. It was just me being flippant really. I'm really angry. I think we
shouldn't be calling them petrol stations. You should call them wife flower stations or something.
We can't let petrol keep having dominoes like that. It might be an interesting reason that
something that is going on in China with electric cars, which is replaceable batteries, as opposed
to charging your existing battery. So you just drive over the marks and then the machine does the
rest. And it's like, it's especially useful for big heavy trucks. We're obviously putting in
load of electricity even at very fast rates would take a while, but a battery swap three minutes.
That's how the first electric cars were. Someone would come take out your battery and put a new one
it. And the reason was it was kind of based on old stage coaches and stuff where you would take
your horses and you would swap your horses over. It's always just the obvious thing to do.
Whereas now we plug the horses in. But also like they're going to get rid of a mobile phone
integrated batteries, aren't they? That was in the news last week. In the EU at least I think they're
going to make it so whenever you buy a new phone, the battery has to be replaceable. You don't just have
to get rid of it as soon as the battery goes. That's quite good. That's much better. Yeah.
They are the world leaders aren't they in electric cars now, China. 65% of electric cars are sold
by China because partly because they had massive subsidies. So they have ended up with these electric
car graveyards because electric car tech has come on so fast. So in the early 2010s I think there was
huge investment in the subsidies. Hundreds of companies start making them and then the year later
everyone says well I don't want an electric car that can only drive 20 miles because there's a new one
that can drive 50 and so there are these giant car parks with thousands of cars in them. Wow. So they
made last year 31 million cars in China. How many do you think Britain made? I'll say 1 million. I'm
back in Britain. Yeah. Well, you slightly overestimated it. 700,000. And Mexico, Indonesia,
and Turkey made more than last year as well as the Czech Republic and the big hitters like Germany,
India and Japan. But China's journey to this is so recent, isn't it? It's fascinating. It's
not entirely because of but a hugely influential person behind it was a guy called Wang Gang. So he's
China's Minister of Science and Tech and he got that job in 2007. But he had been a teenager in the
cultural revolution. Really horrible time for all concerned. Went through that. And then after it
ended after Mao died, he went to university, studied internal combustion engines, worked at Audi,
and China bought a load of Audi's for you know, if you get a top government job, you get a really
nice government car which would have been a Western car like an Audi at the time. And he noticed
every time we went home, wow, we're using more and more oil in China. And oh yeah, the pollution's
getting worse and worse. I wonder if there's anything we could do to change that. And just pitched it
to the then Minister. And then last year they sold about 8 million electric cars plus 5 million
hybrids. Like it's they've just completely overtaken the rest of the world. China is also world leader
in car carriers or Roros. That's for a boat, isn't it? Roros your boat. Roros stands for roll on roll off.
And they are car-carrying boats. So they are more convenient than Lolo's which are lift-on-lift-offs
for boats carrying any kind of cargo that doesn't have wheels. Because you drive cars on and off them,
you get roll-roll ferries, isn't it? Yes, exactly. Yeah. And China's about to build the world's biggest
one which is going to carry any guesses on how many cars? Oh, a lot. 10,000. That's a good guess actually.
12,800. You're kidding. Pretty good, right? Can I ask one more question just on this. China is just
built a new snooker building where you can go and play snooker. How many snooker tables do you
reckon there are in this building? No, I heard this on TV this week. Because China is the other
center of worlds snooker apart from Sheffield, right? It's like a Sheffield and China. I'm going to go
big as an opening. I'm going to say a hundred thousand. Okay. One for every 50,000 checkers boards
that's currently in existence. I'm going to bring it back to reality and say a thousand
is exactly the right answer. It's over nice. Oh, yes. One thousand snooker tables in the same room.
It doesn't sound as much now that I dropped my bomb on that. It's your guess, sorry.
Well, it's just because 12,800 is far more than I thought could fit into. I left a 20p on one of
these tables to show I was at that place. Can I finish that? Are you finishing that? I'm finished on
row rows. But also the stever doors, which is cool because you rarely get to use that word, stever doors
being people who pack and unpack ships. Dozens will work on their ship at once. They have a huge
car park full of the cars that need to get on the ship. Let's say 40 stever doors jump in 40 cars,
zoom really, really fast because they've got to get 13,000 cars on their ship. Drive up the ramp one
after the other, pin them down and then they'll jump on a minibus, get back there and then speed the
other cars up. It's so cool. That's really cool. That's way, but I recently got the ferry from Dover to
Calais and it was a very different experience. There were no stever doors as far as I could see. When we
came back into Dover, we got stuck for an hour because I had to reverse out and say sorry the ship's
not long enough to reach the port. They do this trip every day. It's not long at all. We had to
re-park it in a different parking spot. That's amazing. The whole scale of this stuff in China is just
nuts, isn't it? We have just had the Beijing Motor Show, which has pretty much overtaken any other
motor show in the world. Do you know it used to be Detroit or whatever. It's now Beijing. In one of
the halls of the Beijing Motor Show recently, one of the halls had more electric cars like models
than a for sale in the whole USA. There were 17 halls at the Beijing Motor Show. Everything's
just huge in China. In China, this was my memory of it. Apparently it's still the case. Seat belts are
really hated by Chinese drivers and they often don't do it, but they get a lot of trouble if they get
pulled over by the police. One way around it was this company started releasing T-shirts that were
white T-shirts with a seat belt pass in over the shirts. That became a massive craze and police had
to pull over more people than usual to see if it was the shirt or an actual seat belt. The problem
is that most cars these days have the noise that goes off the alarm if you've not got your seat belt on,
so there was a big craze of sort of bling-a-fied seat belt buckles without the strap on it that you
put in to confuse the car into thinking that the seat belt was in, but you would get like Pokemon
versions or you would get Snoopy or Winnie the Pooh. That is a night when you have a bag and you put
it on the passenger seat and then your car for the next five hours says. You're a baby, same thing.
Takes to just do the seat belt up behind you, problem solved. My grandma that used to just hold it
across her, she wouldn't plug it in, she would just pull it out and then hold it across her.
Because she was a generation that were against it on principle, right? Well there was like
a theory wasn't there like if you're in a crash you don't want to wear a seat belt because you want
to be flung away from the wreckage. The car was just crashing with his far away from it as possible.
In 1907 there was a peeking to Paris race which was a big deal for cars in China at the time,
but the Chinese suspected that all the races were spies because they were mostly Europeans who had
come over and some of these cars they had like the mudguards on the car, they were especially arranged
so you could take them off and you could use them as planks whenever you needed to drive over a swamp.
Oh cool and in Kazan in Russia because it had to go through Russia to use fledin terror when they
saw the car because they'd never seen one before and initially Novgorod, one of the cars bright in
the horse and the locals started throwing stones at the drivers because they were like you come
over here frightening our horses. The winner was a guy called Prince Scipione Borghazy and he was so
far ahead of all the other cars he was 17 days ahead at one point that he attended four days for
celebration in Moscow halfway through the race and still won by a week. The first sort of car was in
China. Oh yeah. Yeah made in China. 1680s car number one. No hang on come on car number one 1680s car
number two 1890s or something but yeah Connor this was made by a Flemish Jesuit missionary so it was
a nice merging of Eastern West back then a guy called Ferdinand Verbiost. It was Ching dynasty and he
invented a car which was steam powered with coal powering it which is pretty amazing. We didn't
1680. Correct. Didn't even really have steam powered stuff then. Who would have been and he
alive to experience this? Oh what a good question. Well not Oliver or Richard Kromel sadly of
course. This Verbiost guy did he drive run travel. I see what you're doing because of the name. Yeah he
was the Verbiost guy. Yeah very good. The only problem with. That's not the worstest joke you're
he it was 65 centimetres long and it was actually a toy for the Emperor. But it still works you
can say and you can squeeze into that if you're desperate you can squeeze into a 65 centimetre.
How fast would it? It was just a run around and he's got the parking. It didn't say how fast it
went but it could go for an hour before it needed more coal. And he's interesting because he's the
only Westerner ever to have received an honorary name after death in China. So if you've done something
impressive in China the Emperor would give you a name after you died. Oh wow. And the Emperor
really liked him because he did other cool stuff and so he was called Chinmin which means diligent
and clever. Very nice. Can I tell you one of my other Chinese electric car heroes? Yeah, Wang
Tranfu. So he's the head of BYD. Oh and they're the biggies. They're massive. There's one other but
they're yeah. They again they used to make batteries from mobile phones and then they got via that
into bigger batteries and then thought you know what cars. He once showed investors he was at a
meeting with you know Warren Buffett. Yeah. So is it Berkshire Hathaway? His huge investment firm.
BYD in their very early days were trying to get investment from Warren Buffett. And as an investor
meeting, Wang Tranfu once showed investors how clean and safe his batteries were by drinking
from a glass of battery fluid in front of him. Wow. He said, look the stuff is great. Wait,
for that. I don't need it to be drinkable. I know. I know. Yes, it's exactly what point he was
making actually. Is it not highly acidic? That's really fluid. I guess his stuff was not. Right.
He didn't drop down dead as part of the PR stuff. Oh, sorry, I forgot to say he dropped down dead as part of
but he got the deal. Yeah, very impressive.
Okay, it is time for fact number three and that is my fact. My fact this week is that the reason
a World War II bomb whistled as it fell from the sky is because it had a big whistle on it.
Is this a specific bomb we're talking about or is it all the bomb? It wouldn't have been
every single bomb. Absolutely. That's right. But these were German bombs and the idea was it was
an intimidation tactic like the Blitz ones. Yeah, yeah. It would have been in those because a lot of
the memories of people during the Blitz talk about the whistling sound of the bomb as it came down.
And the Germans decided that they wanted to use this as a tactic. So they literally attached a whistle
like device to the fins of the bomb so that as it came down it created that sound. Whereas when we
now go we think oh that's just a sound of a bomb. But actually it's not a sound of a whistle.
I actually think it's a sound of something falling. Like in my head it's like Wally Kael too makes
that sound right. Yeah, it's falling. So I just thought it was like actually I never really thought
about it. And if I did think about it I would know it was wrong. But it kind of just thought things
that fall just go like that. But that will have come from the bottom. Sorry. Yeah. Cause the sound gets
it's getting deeper. Yeah. Yeah. But as we know from the Doppler effects, if it's a police
siren driving past you or something it will get higher as it approached you and then deeper as it
went further away again. It's because movies have tricked us. Yeah. Yeah. The whistle that you hear
in the movies is the perspective of the pilot, not the person on the ground. We should do
I've started doing that since I read, since I read, like read this and was like, oh yeah, of course
you know with kids when you feed them you go, it was an aeroplane. Well, I've started doing
as it descends into his mouth. It's interesting because it was used as a sort of intimidation tactic.
I read an account by a guy called Harold Troutson who in 1941 he was, he was a young boy and he
remembers being in his kitchen and he, he hears the noise of the bomb coming down. And so they
immediately jumped under the table because many tables had cages underneath them as a bowl protection
device. Turns out it was the neighbor's kettle whistling and that's how sensitive everyone was at
the time specifically to that sound. There was loads of it around in the wall. So we do loads of
problems. Yeah. No loads of noise being used to a certain extent psychologically. So all of history.
All of history. Yeah. Yeah. You're right. So the, but the, uh, the stuka plane, which is the
Junkers 87, J U 87, they had little fan like whistling devices put on because they were dive
bombing planes. So the idea is you dive down as close as possible to the target, release the bombs
when you're really close so they land accurately and then you fly off again. But they were fitted with
special devices which made them scream. And it was a very terrifying sound to hear the, the scream
of this stuka plane. But it did slow them down a bit that by about 15 miles an hour. So they took
them off eventually because it made them easier to shoot down. Well, like, remember the night which is
who we've mentioned before. The Soviet female pilots. And they were in really old rickety planes
because they gave them like the wooden plates. But they couldn't go very high, but they were very
noisy because they were old. And they used sound because it would just disrupt people's sleep.
You were on edge all the time or also like you would have to use anti-aircraft stuff in the middle
of the night so no one could get any sleep. So it's kind of a psychological thing in that way
that you disdress. I think it's called harassing fire. It's known as, you deliberately do something
just to harass people and not necessarily to bomb them. Well, the famous example in Second World War
that our grandparents always used to talk about was the doodle bugs, wasn't it? The doodle bug was
basically German drone essentially. So the V1? Yes, the V1. Which it would be fired and it was sort of
like powered by a sort of jet as it went through the air. And it was programmed to stop at a certain
point. And the famous thing about the doodle bug, which everyone always remembers, is that when it's
engine was programmed to cut out, that was when it plummets out of the air. So you hear that pup pup
and then a sudden silence, which actually I have a friend of mine in the village, Laurie is in
his early 90s and he still remembers whenever you heard that silence. You know, you probably don't
have time to save yourself at that point. Well, he must be very happy to live next door to someone
with a young child. Never any silence. The V2, which was the successor rocket, you don't,
you don't have that psychological nightmare of hearing it and then cut out because it's going
so fast that you don't hear it. You just hear a big bang. Right. If you hear the big bang, you know
you haven't been killed by it. That's a good point. Relief. I mean, they're both, they're both bad.
They're both not as bad as the big bang theory. If you hear that, you know, no. You long for silence.
Here's an interesting whistling bomb. In 1965, the attack squadron 25, the American squadron
toilet bombed Vietnam. So they wanted to mark the fact that they dropped six million pounds of
ordnance on the country and they did it by taking an old toilet, taking it up on the plane and
then dropping it out. And because of the holes in the toilet or something, it just whistled all the way
down. Right. And that has to commemorate how much they've dropped on. It's just like soldiers, you
know, soldiers being soldiers, soldiers being soldiers. Yeah. But actually previously in the
Korean War, there was a kitchen sink bomb that was dropped on Korea because someone had said
we've dropped everything on them except the kitchen sink. And so they deliberately just got a
kitchen sink and dropped it down as well. Make your own fun, having you in war. I guess you said
it's human changes a bit, doesn't it? Yeah. I like this real nonchalance. In an article I read from
Time magazine in 1940, because so it's September 1940, this is written, so middle of the battle of
Britain. And it said, last week, while screaming bombs were falling on London, Seamarton Wilbur,
curator at Chicago's Museum of Natural History, caught attention to the exhibit of Chinese whistling
arrows and used the blitz as a way to segue into ancient Chinese whistling arrows. But these were the
precursor. So these were arrows that were hollow on the inside. And so they whistled as they flew.
And they were to frighten people. And the Emperor at the Manchu Emperor used them to scare people
off the streets when he was walking through. So they couldn't harm people, the ones that he used.
How interesting. Genghis Khan used those as well. That was a biggie. Yeah. And that was more so used as
an intimidation tactic prior to a siege. So if the noise and the confusion, it's scare horses.
If you had all these arrows and this noise coming, so it would cause chaos amongst the enemy,
and then you make your strike. That was kind of like one of the earliest things in war, wasn't it,
to scare the horses. That's why you would use, you're scaring the opponents as well.
Scaring the horses was a really big deal. And then people started using elephants in warfare.
And noises really got against elephants, because elephants are like really weirdly skittish about
loud noises. Yeah. Yeah. They really are. Perhaps I too am an elephant. So they get a lot of
don't show us that part of cricket. They have very sensitive hearing elephants. So Alexander,
the great learned that a good thing to do when battling against people who had elephants
was to get a load of pigs and trumpets, make the pigs squeal, blow the trumpets, and then the
elephants would run away. I know, you know, if you're one of his cavalrymen and he's, do you want
a pig or a trumpet to carry on your horse? But he's run out of trumpets. You draw on the shorts,
draw underneath. But if everyone's going hungry, you can't eat the trumpet. Good point.
So it's, yeah, it makes blessings. That's true. Yeah. Is that just because elephants have got really
big ears that their hearing is so good? I think some of the hearing goes through their feet as well,
just now. I think they just don't like vibrations. Yeah. I don't know, because they don't like bees,
either, do they? Like because of the buzzing of the bees. Yeah, they hate bees. Not the stings,
the buzz. Yeah. And nice. Is that true? I thought no, it's cartoons. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, but we're dealing
with whistling bombs for a good. So, you know, I did find TVtropes.com, which advised me on the
whistling bombs thing. Oh, yeah. Said, please remember, if you should ever find yourself in an area
often bombarded from the sky, that not all projectiles make such a sound. If you are informed
something deadly, mainland nearby, you should duck or take cover, even if you don't hear the whistle.
I think if you're taking your advice, if you're in a bombardment situation and you're reading
your on TVtropes.com. Well, look, I could, I try to speak to the buffens at fun.com.
I think these days it's like the buzz of a drone, isn't it? Yes. Yes. Yes. We trouble. We do get to hear
a close example of a whistling bomb in London these days. When would you have heard that?
On nights of celebration, on bonfire night fireworks. The whistling sounds. It's a manufactured sound
that's attached to it. And so like all these things, like the toilet has a hole in it, it has holes.
It's not even by holes. It's a chemical mix. It's called whistle mix. And whistle mix. Yeah.
Potassium benzoate is used. I'm going to start a tribute act of little mix.
We just play very high pitch. For dogs. That's insane. Yeah. And is it the fireworks?
It's because they're going further away. They're doing the right thing. They're doing the right way around.
They're a bag of lots of physics. Thanks fireworks. My favourite bomb disposal
person as they were on bombs. Have you heard of Peter Gurney? He was this massive hero of
bomb disposal. And obviously, people who do bomb disposal are unbelievably brave. Yeah.
Particularly when you're dealing with bombs that, for example, have been planted,
whether it's a car bomber, like a second mobile bomb or a bomb that's been fired and they're not
gone off, they're all kind of made in a factory, right? So you know roughly how to do them.
People have known how to defuse. Can I just say Andy? I actually think the people who defuse
those are quite brave as well. Okay. Well, yeah, I guess that's true. But the really brave people.
No, when you're like, if it's like an IRA bomb or something, which has just been made by an
enthusiastic amateur, what's that TV show where that woman goes around diffusing bombs?
Oh, I don't know. Oh, it's Trigger Python. Fictional. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's a real TV show.
So Peter Gurney did this. He defused thousands of bombs over his career in Berlin and Egypt and Libya.
But he just had to walk towards them, you know, knowing nothing about the structure and then,
like, seeing what was there. And because they have tricks on them. So what would you use in
tuition? Well, like, how could you possibly use any logic for an unlogical thing? Lots of experience
or like if one part of it is removed, then that'll trigger another bit and you have to work it out.
So he would often use medical scouples, a ball of string, garden secateurs and fish hooks. And then
this moment happened in 1991 in February. Some shells were fired at 10 Downing Street and one
and more in the middle of town. One landed in the garden of 10 Downing Street, hugely dangerous.
He has to walk towards it, but the buildings around there are really tall, so he has no radio signal.
Is this Snapchat era? John Major, it would have been. So he has to straddle this bomb,
right? And what he's armed with is a twig and a spanner that he's borrowed from the Prime Minister's
boiler, okay? Why does he bring his equipment? I guess I don't know why he didn't have it with him,
but it was an immediate urgent thing. He didn't have time to go and get it. It's just landed in
10 Downing Street. I bet that happens to him all the time. Another... I'm so nervous.
Prime Minister, have you got any secateurs? No, but I've got this spanner from my boiler.
I'm my lucky twig. So he was sitting a stride the bomb and this is from his obituary. By the way,
he died last year, age 93. He survives this. He was conscious of an intense heat through his
fire resistant trousers. So he should remember to put his fire resistant trousers on. I don't know
why he doesn't have his kit. Prime Minister, do you have any clothing that I can use?
But as he put it in his autobiography, Brave Men Walk Away, he suddenly realised that if he
didn't do something quickly, he would never again sing anything other than soprano. So he has to hop
off the bomb, scoop up some snow from a nearby Structe Snow Tower because it's February,
shove it down his trousers, then get back on the bomb. And he manages it. He diffuses it.
Wow. Incredible. And like I say, he lived at the age of 93 and he died last year.
I can't believe he needed to be struggling it rather than just next to it.
Excuse me in this regard. That was also a jubber to excuse me to curry.
Well, I've got one other old ancient whistling noise to intimidate. It's the Aztec death whistle.
Have you heard of that? Yeah.
Yeah. So in the 1990s, I was doing some excavations in New Mexico when they found this boy
who was in a temple underground dead. Holding. A long time ago, right? A long time ago.
A long time ago, you're dead. So expected. Like, I'm not so afraid of that.
Not the surprising bit. Okay. So he was holding in one of his hands this object that no one had really
seen before. And it was called the Aztec death whistle from then on. And you would blow into it.
And it would make a noise that sounded like a wind. Everyone thought maybe it was used for
rituals when wind wasn't available. And they're not sure whether or not there's a lot of theories
but might have been used in the war field to intimidate people. And so I happen to know someone
who owns a modern death whistle. Aztec death whistle. And so I reached out to them to give us a sample.
So this is a friend of the podcast. So here we go. But a death whistle there for you by Ristabi.
So thank you, Rist. But no, Rist, that could have been just him screamers. I do have questions if
that was just him. But I read about those death whistles. And I think we might have done it on QI.
We might have thought about doing it on QI that probably the modern ones are bigger and
they're deliberately made to make screaming noises. And the original ones let you say a more windy
base or wind base. Yeah, I think that's I think and some people are trying to push that they were
used on the battlefield. But again, we've got so little info about it, but it was found in this temple.
But that scream is a very realistic sounds like a woman wailing. Yeah. I mean, it sounded like
Ristabi whaling. I'll check with them. Ristabi whaling after he sat on a hot bomb.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show. That is Andy. My fact is flatworms sometimes grow
heads at both ends by mistake. How do we know they're doing it by mistake? Yeah. Would you do it
off purpose? It's a party trick. Yeah. Yeah. They do they normally grow them the right way round
and occasionally things go wrong. So that's why we think it's by mistake. Okay. Yeah, scientists
haven't done the requisite interviews to find out if this is just like a fun thing for them. So
right, flatworms, right? These are for anyone who's not familiar. These are just, I mean, as they
sound, they're flatworms. They're not your fancy posh ringed worms. They're not even related to
earthworms, really, are they? No. Like, things that you gain your garden. They're just completely
different. These are just useless little flatworms. No, no. Okay, we've got a disagreement of opinion
about them. But they're only flat at the edges, like toasties, like there's jackals. That's what they
remind me of. Yeah, yeah. Well, they're very ancient lifeforms, obviously. And there are loads of
different species of them. Some of them breed by just separating themselves in two. These are the ones
that, if you cut the head off, they grow another head. Or if you cut it into it becomes two worms.
Or if you cut off a tiny bit, it grows a whole new one from that. So imagine if I, right now,
grew a head in like roughly where my stomach is. Oh, yeah. And then everything above that head grows
a new pair of legs from there. Does the head look exactly the same as yours? Or does it look like a
brother? I think it's a cloning thing. Okay. So there's a new Andy's head in the middle of my
stomach. Yeah. And then from above that, I just grow new legs and hips and everything. And then
that Andy has my legs already. Why's it got the same name? I would give it a different name,
so that's going to get confusing. Even if it's Andy too, that's better than Andy. Okay. Yeah,
sorry. So Andy too gets my old legs. Right. Does Andy want an Andy to communicate with each other?
How are you doing? We're not close. We're not friends, but yeah, we're colleagues. Yeah. I mean,
that's as close as you get to a friend, isn't it? Really? Look, I know you grew out of my body.
I just don't think we're quite there yet. That's how the fat worms do it. Well, I didn't understand
that explanation, even though it was really good. So you're saying, grows up your tummy, and then he
keeps your original legs, but some new legs grow higher up your body when you get to have an old Andy.
Me, I grow new legs. Okay. And he gets my legs and he grows a new head, right? Let's look at him
because you have very long legs where you keep a lot of your height. Certainly. I've got a real job
growing another pair of legs as long and listen as those, but no one said listen, but okay.
And sometimes these fat worms get it wrong, right? Oh dear. They will, they will grow a second head,
this is quite confusing. They grow a second head halfway out them facing the right way,
but then at the bottom of the top half, so my old Andy, right? Me, I accidentally grow another
head after separating off. So I, Andy, am now ahead at this end and head at the other end as well,
is your new bottom head, is that facing upside down or the right way out? Are you like the
King of Clubs? Yes. Yes, right. Facing the wrong way. And you've got no legs now, right? Or do you
also still grow the legs? Well, I'm a worm at this, so it doesn't matter. You've just said you grow new,
yeah, yeah, yeah. That was the analogy I was trying. But actually, good point, worms don't have legs,
hang on. If this whole analogy, whenever Andy says legs, you have to imagine it's the tail of a worm.
I don't think I can have made it any clearer than I have done. I think you're right. So let's imagine
Andy one and Andy two, okay. Andy one has now got two heads and has no tail. How are you going to
poo? Don't know. You don't know. Haven't thought this through? We've consulted with each other,
neither of us know. And that's why I said, by mistake, in my original fact, so I do think this is a
no. Do you know James? I do know. How am I going to poo? Well, the lucky thing is that flat worms poo
and eat in the same hole. Yes. That's not lucky for most of your life. But in this specific instance,
where you have two heads, it doesn't matter so much because you can poo out of your mouth.
But surely, I'm sorry, this is not getting a bit gross. But if I've got a head and either end,
aren't things heading the other way towards Andy two? I'm not going to have to poo out
anything he's been eating. No, he's me. You would eat it and poo it out of your face.
Andy two will eat it and poo it out of his face. Okay, well, that's fine. You'd have to come
to a compromise if it was that other version when you take turns in eating and then being the
the anus for the meal, wouldn't you? Oh, I thought like no curries or something. Oh, right. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because you don't want to be a date and then suddenly you're just purring at your mouth. I don't think
I'm going on many days. Let me tell you about my list of legs. I can't say.
Over there there's Andy with two sets of legs outside there. He's surrounded by women.
The thing about the heads coming off and the head new heads coming is the new heads have the same
memories and we don't understand that. It's crazy. They tested this with plenary and flatworms,
a kind of flatworm. They trained them up on a half on a rough surface, half on a smooth surface.
And then they got them to find food all on a rough surface. And the ones who've been trained on
a rough surface darted to the food because they like travelling on it. The ones who've been raised
on the smooth surface were like, oh, what's this rough surface? Anyway, then they caught all the heads off.
And then when the new heads came back, the heads that had been raised on the rough surface remembered
to be chill about the rough surface. It's like a really complicated way of showing they have memories.
I don't know why they didn't just ask, you know, do you remember 9/11 or whatever, but that's how they
did it. And they remember they're upbringing even though it's a different head. They do a while.
They do really stupid experiments with these things, so don't they? Because they're so wacky,
they want to see what their limits are. So there's a guy called James McConnell in 1964 who puts
some flatworms in a maze and taught them how to complete the maze. And then he chopped them up and
fed them to another flatworm. And then put that flatworm into the maze and the flatworm could also
complete the maze without being taught how to do it. And his theory was that basically they had learned
through their food. Interesting. Is it like talking to them from inside? Well, it turns out that
no one's been able to replicate this experiment. And what they think happened is the first flatworm
left a load of slime in the maze and the second one just followed the slime. He didn't clean the maze
out. But given what we know about it, given that they can regenerate memories after being
decapitated, I mean, yeah, it sounds like that experiment was flawed, but it's crazy what they
can do. What can they do? They can regrow their head and remember, I thought you meant once it's
re-grown what they can do. So many can't remember things even with the same head. It is just not,
doesn't it? Like if we could harness these abilities, we'd be unstoppable. We would. If we could,
they can regrow from one 279th of their original mass. That's insane. So I don't know what that is
for a human. It must be your little finger or something. Yeah. And there also, there's so many
firsts in the flatworm world. So they're incredibly old. They're about 839 million years old.
I'm going to take away the about because that's a very precise number. They are 839 million years old.
They're probably the first hunter and the first thing that moved with any kind of purpose rather
than just floating like plankton. So they chose what direction to go and moved. They're the first
animals with a nervous system, a head, a brain, eyes. They're the first animal ever to internally
fertilize rather than just leaving eggs around. And they were the first bilaterally symmetrical animals,
i.e. ones with left and right sides like pretty much all animals we know today. They pioneered
that, having a left and right side. So obviously you get like jellyfish and stuff or stuff that
symmetrical in lots of directions. But yeah. And I was looking at other, I was looking at asymmetrical
animals. There are some really cool. Can you think of asymmetrical animals? An amoeba.
Are they symmetrical? I know what you mean, but they're just as likely to be blobby on one side as
the other, right? It's not like they'll always have this on the left and always have that on the right.
I'm thinking like starfish, but I don't think they are, are they? They're symmetrical. I don't
like see-toot-crabbs. Oh, fiddler crabs, yeah, because they have one massive claw.
Oh, the massive claw. Flatfish. Remember that I, my greats, around a flatfish, so that it has two
eyes on one side. Javelin throwers. Javelin throwers and Reff and Adal. Yeah.
Chronic Master Painter. Fiddler people.
Welcome back, Anna. Thanks very much. Did you read about the new flatworm they discovered
that was named after Covid? No. Humbertium, Covidium. They just named it after that because
a lot of the study was written during lockdown. But there's another flatworm called Hancock anus,
which has nothing to do with Covid, surprisingly. But they get involved with penis fencing.
Penis fencing is because they're all hemaphroditic. They're always fighting over who will be the one
that puts their sperm into the other one and the way that they do it is by a little bit of a penis
fight and then the winner gets to inseminate the other one. Yeah, because it's worse to be pregnant
as I personally know, than to not be pregnant. Yeah, but at least they get nine months off.
Off. Well, I'll see you after the show, James. I was reading about the native and non-native flatworms
because they're great. They're very interesting, but lots of them are not native to the UK and they
absolutely decimate normal earthworms. Just they hunt them, they kill them and native earthworms,
which are really good for soil. Obviously, and brilliant in all sorts of ways, just get written
off when flatworms invade. It's because we're trading plants and trading soil and stuff. But as a result
of this, I found and joined the earthworm society of Britain. Oh, that's nice. Membership is five
pounds per year. Okay. How did these guys make any money? And all of these people that you join,
like the Lighthouse Keepers Association or the Wall Papers Association, they get so little money
from you. Well, those guys are 25 quid. This was a fiver. It didn't say anywhere what you get for
the fiver, but I was so excited by that point that I just joined. Maybe you sponsor an earthworm,
you know, you get letters from it. I think you got it cheap because you got an early bird discount.
Why isn't that on their website? I'll tell you what happens when my membership is processed.
I'm very excited. Yeah. Oh, so that's it. You remember? Yeah. Okay, looking forward to installing two of
that. God for James's joke. Everyone's going to think we've got to put in the end of that anecdote.
There wasn't one, guys. What happens is I know. I've developed this tactic where I just say something
and then these guys save me. That was my thing. Did you guys come across the Maya's tapeworm trap?
The Maya's tapeworm trap. Yes. No. So tapeworms are a kind of flatworm. I'm famous for living in
your tummy and eating all your food and the things that you don't necessarily want living inside you.
And so in 1854, a doctor called Alfias Mayas patented a trap. And it's so good. I don't know why it
wasn't mass-produced, actually. It's a hollow tube made of gold that contains a bit of cheese.
What? And you swallow the trap. You leave it in your tummy and as he explains, the worm will eventually
seize the cheese. You have to fast for a few days so that the worm's really hungry. It will seize the
cheese and then the trap will spring shot on it and trap it and then you can pull it out with the
string. So he says, and he says the convenient thing is you can just fix the cord that hangs out of
your mouth somewhere on your shirt. It's right. It's a bit like a baby's dummy. Yes. So you can go about
your day. But it's dangling out of your mouth all the time. Yes. But eventually he says you'll feel
the tugging and you'll see the string move. And it'll be the tapeworm tugging on the cheese. And at
that point you just pull the string up and you extract the tapeworm. I have a question. I have a few.
Isn't your body constantly trying to process and push this tube through you? Yeah. Because you've
swallowed it and that's how your your intestines function. The peristalsis would take it down to your
stomach. By think it could theoretically stay there. If there's enough, if you've got something else.
Yeah. So stomach, okay. I thought tapeworms were in your lower intestine. I don't know what Andy.
Well done. You've highlighted the floor in his plan. The tapeworm couldn't have got up to the tummy.
So it was actually a perfect invention except for the fact that it wasn't right. Or could he not just
shove this golden trap up his ass? As I'm sure a lot of early potential investors told him.
Okay. That's it. That is all of our facts. Thank you so much for listening. If you'd like to get in
contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast, we can
all be found online. I'm on @Sriberland on Instagram. James. My Instagram is no such thing as James
Harkin. Andy. And you can get us as a group where Anna. Um, can't I can't remember?
Online. Yeah. No such thing as vice.com or you can email podcast at qi.com.
Correct. We're on Instagram. We can do Instagram at no such thing or TikTok probably.
Yeah. Um, and if you want to send us any of your feedback to make it towards our bonus shows,
which is little fish and drop us a line podcast at qi.com as Anna says. Send them there. Andy monitors
all the emails coming in. He picks out the best bits of feedback for dual drop us a line. Um,
and that's a hidden members club show. So if you want to be part of the secret committee, the secret
club known as clubfish, just go to patreon.com/clubfish and you'll find us there. Uh, but if you got a great
fact as well, do send that to the same email address because we pick the best of those and bring them
to our Monday show little fish. So if you want to hear your fact read out, do that there. Uh,
otherwise just come back next week because we're going to be back here with another episode and we'll
see you then. Good bye.
(upbeat music)
[BLANK_AUDIO]